AI Transformation Playbook
How to lead your company into the AI era
by Andrew Ng
AI (Artificial Intelligence) technology is now
1. Execute pilot projects to
poised to transform every industry, just as
gain momentum
electricity did 100 years ago. Between now and
2030, it will create an estimated $13 trillion It is more important for your first few AI projects
of GDP growth.1 While it has already created to succeed rather than be the most valuable AI
projects. They should be meaningful enough so
tremendous value in leading technology
that the initial successes will help your company
companies such as Google, Baidu, Microsoft and
gain familiarity with AI and also convince others
Facebook, much of the additional waves of value
in the company to invest in further AI projects;
creation will go beyond the software sector.
they should not be so small that others would
This AI Transformation Playbook draws on consider it trivial. The important thing is to get
insights gleaned from leading the Google Brain the flywheel spinning so that your AI team can
team and the Baidu AI Group, which played gain momentum.
leading roles in transforming both Google and
Suggested characteristics for the first few AI
Baidu into great AI companies. It is possible
projects:
for any enterprise to follow this Playbook and
• It should ideally be possible for a new or
become a strong AI company, though these
external AI team (which may not have deep
recommendations are tailored primarily for
domain knowledge about your business)
larger enterprises with a market cap/valuation
to partner with your internal teams (which
from $500M to $500B.
have deep domain knowledge) and build AI
These are the steps I recommend for transforming solutions that start showing traction within
your enterprise with AI, which I will explain in 6-12 months
this playbook: • The project should be technically feasible.
Too many companies are still starting
projects that are impossible using today’s AI
1. Execute pilot projects to gain
technology; having trusted AI engineers do
momentum
due diligence on a project before kickoff will
2. Build an in-house AI team increase your conviction in its feasibility.
• Have a clearly defined and measurable
3. Provide broad AI training
objective that creates business value.
4. Develop an AI strategy
When I was leading the Google Brain team,
there was significant skepticism within Google
5. Develop internal and external
(and more broadly, around the world) of deep
communications
learning technology. To help the team gain
momentum, I chose the Google Speech team
as my first internal customer, and we worked
closely with them to make Google Speech
1 https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/artificial-intelligence/notes-
from-the-ai-frontier-modeling-the-impact-of-ai-on-the-world-economy recognition much more accurate.
© DeepLearning.AI All rights reserved. | deeplearning.ai ©DeepLearning.AI All rights reserved. | deeplearning.a1i
Speech recognition is a meaningful project within The key responsibilities of the AI unit are:
Google, but not the most important one—for
• Build up an AI capability to support the whole
example, it is less important to the company
company.
bottom line than applying AI to web search or
advertising. But by making the Speech team • Execute an initial sequence of cross-functional
more successful using deep learning, other projects to support different divisions/business
teams started to gain faith in us, which enabled units with AI projects. After completing the
the Google Brain team to gain momentum. initial projects, set up repeated processes to
continuously deliver a sequence of valuable
Once other teams started to see the success of
AI projects.
Google Speech working with Google Brain, we
• Develop consistent standards for recruiting
were able to acquire more internal customers.
and retention.
The team’s second major internal customer
was Google Maps, which used deep learning • Develop company-wide platforms that are
to improve the quality of map data. With two useful to multiple divisions/business units
successes, I started conversations with the and are unlikely to be developed by an
advertising team. Building up momentum individual division. For example, consider
gradually led to more and more successful AI working with the CTO/CIO/CDO to develop
projects. This process is a repeatable model that unified data warehousing standards.
you can use in your company. Many companies are organized with multiple
business units reporting to the CEO. With a new
AI unit, you’ll be able to matrix in AI talent to
2. Build an in-house AI team
the different divisions to drive cross-functional
While outsourced partners with deep technical projects.
AI expertise can help you gain that initial
momentum faster, in the long term it will be
more efficient to execute some projects with an
in-house AI team. Further, you will want to keep
some projects within the company to build a
more unique competitive advantage.
It is important to have buy-in from the C-suite
to build this internal team. During the rise of
the internet, hiring a CIO was a turning point for
many companies to have a cohesive strategy for
using the internet. In contrast, the companies
that ran many independent experiments—
ranging from digital marketing to data science
experiments to new website launches—failed to
leverage internet capabilities if these small pilot
projects did not manage to scale to transform
the rest of the company.
In the AI era, a key moment for many companies New job descriptions and new team organizations
will again be the formation of a centralized AI will emerge. The way I now organize the work
team that can help the whole company. This AI of my teams in roles like a Machine Learning
team could sit under the CTO, CIO, or CDO (Chief Engineer, Data Engineer, Data Scientist, and AI
Data Officer or Chief Digital Officer) function if Product Manager is different than the pre-AI
they have the right skillset. It could also be led by era. A good AI leader will be able to advise you
a dedicated CAIO (Chief AI Officer). on setting up the right processes.
© DeepLearning.AI All rights reserved. | deeplearning.ai 2
There is currently a war for AI talent, and However, a notional education plan may look like
unfortunately most companies will have a this:
hard time hiring a Stanford AI PhD student (or
perhaps even a Stanford AI undergrad). Since
1. Executives and senior business leaders:
the talent war is largely zero-sum in the short
(≥4 hours training)
term, working with a recruiting partner that can
help you build an AI team will give you a non-
GOAL:
trivial advantage. However, providing training
Enable executives to understand what AI can
to your existing team can also be a good way to
do for your enterprise, begin developing AI
create a lot of new talent in-house.
strategy, make appropriate resource allocation
decisions, and collaborate smoothly with an AI
3. Provide broad AI training team that is supporting valuable AI projects.
No company today has enough in-house AI talent.
While the media reports of high AI salaries are CURRICULUM:
over-hyped (the numbers quoted in press tend to • Basic business understanding of AI including
be outliers), AI talent is hard to find. Fortunately, basic technology, data, and what AI can and
with the rise of digital content, including MOOCs
cannot do.
(massive open online courses) such as Coursera,
ebooks, and YouTube videos, it is more cost • Understanding of AI’s impact on corporate
effective than ever to train up large numbers of strategy.
employees in new skills such as AI. The smart
CLO (Chief Learning Officer) knows that their • Case studies on AI applications to adjacent
job is to curate, rather than create content, and industries or to your specific industry.
then to establish processes to ensure employees
complete the learning experiences.
2. Leaders of divisions carrying out AI
Ten years ago, employee training meant hiring projects: (≥12 hours training)
consultants to come to your office to give
lectures. But this was inefficient, and the ROI was GOAL:
unclear. In contrast, digital content is much more Division leaders should be able to set direction
affordable and also gives employees a more for AI projects, allocate resources, monitor and
personalized experience. If you do have the budget track progress, and make corrections as needed
to hire consultants, the in-person content should
to ensure successful project delivery.
complement the online content. (This is called the
“flipped classroom” pedagogy. I have found that,
CURRICULUM:
when implemented correctly, this results in faster
• Basic business understanding of AI including
learning and a more enjoyable learning experience.
basic technology, data, and what AI can and
For example, at Stanford University, my on-campus
cannot do.
deep learning class is taught using this form of
pedagogy.) Hiring a few AI experts to deliver some
• Basic technical understanding of AI, including
in-person content can also help motivate your
major classes of algorithms and their
employees to learn these AI techniques.
requirements.
AI will transform many different jobs. You should
• Basic understanding of the workflow
give everyone the knowledge they will need to
and processes of AI projects, roles
adapt to their new roles in the AI era. Consulting
with an expert will allow you to develop a and responsibilities in AI teams, and
customized curriculum for your team. management of AI team.
© DeepLearning.AI All rights reserved. | deeplearning.ai 3
is to build several difficult assets that are broadly
3. AI engineer trainees:
aligned with a coherent strategy. It thus becomes
(≥100 hours training)
difficult for a competitor to replicate all of these
GOAL: assets simultaneously.
Newly trained AI engineers should be able to
Leverage AI to create an advantage specific
gather data, train AI models, and deliver specific
Rather than trying
to your industry sector:
AI projects.
to compete “generally” in AI with leading tech
companies such as Google, I recommend
CURRICULUM:
instead becoming a leading AI company in your
• Deep technical understanding of machine
industry sector, where developing unique AI
learning and deep learning; basic understanding
capabilities will allow you to gain a competitive
of other AI tools.
advantage. How AI affects your company’s
strategy will be industry- and situation-specific.
• Understanding of available (open-source and
other 3rd party) tools for building AI and data
Design strategies aligned with the “Virtuous
systems.
In many
Cycle of AI” positive-feedback loop:
industries, we will see data accumulation
• Ability to implement AI teams’ workflow and
leading to a defensible business:
processes.
• Additionally: Ongoing education to keep up-
to-date with evolving AI technology
4. Develop an AI strategy
An AI strategy will guide your company toward
creating value while also building defensible
moats. Once teams start to see the success
of the initial AI projects and form a deeper
understanding of AI, you will be able to identify
the places where AI can create the most value
and focus resources on those areas.
Some executives will think that developing
an AI strategy should be the first step. In my
experience, most companies will not be able to
develop a thoughtful AI strategy until it has had
some basic experience with AI, which partial
progress in steps 1-3 will give you.
The way you build defensible moats is also For example, leading web search engines such
evolving with AI. Here are some approaches to as Google, Baidu, Bing and Yandex have a huge
consider: data asset showing them what links a user clicks
on after different search queries. This data
Build several difficult AI assets that are helps the companies build a more accurate
broadly aligned with a coherent strategy: search engine product (A), which in turn helps
AI is enabling companies to build unique them acquire more users (B), which in turn
competitive advantages in new ways. Michael results in their having even more user data (C).
Porter’s seminal writings on business strategy This positive feedback loop is hard for
show that one way to start a defensible business competitors to break into.
© DeepLearning.AI All rights reserved. | deeplearning.ai 4
Data is a key asset for AI systems. Thus, many allows you to acquire users faster than your
great AI companies also have a sophisticated competitors, it could be leveraged into building
data strategy. Key elements of your data a moat that is defensible through platform
strategy may include: dynamics. More broadly, you can also use AI
as a key component of low cost strategy, high
Useful AI
Strategic data acquisition: value, or other business strategies.
systems can be built with anywhere from
100 data points (“small data”) to 100,000,000
data points (“big data”). But having more 5. Develop internal and external
data almost never hurts. AI teams are using
communications
very sophisticated, multi-year strategies to
acquire data, and specific data acquisition AI will affect your business significantly. To the
strategies are industry- and situation-specific. extent that it affects your key stakeholders,
For example, Google and Baidu both have you should run a communications program
numerous free products that do not monetize to ensure alignment. Here is what you should
but allow them to acquire data that can be consider for each audience:
monetized elsewhere.
Leading AI companies
Investor Relations:
If you have 50 such as Google and Baidu are now much more
Unified data warehouses:
different databases siloed under the control valuable companies in part because of their AI
of 50 different VPs or divisions, it will be nearly capabilities and the impact that AI has on their
impossible for an engineer or for AI software bottom lines. Explaining a clear value creation
to get access to this data and “connect the thesis for AI in your company, describing your
dots.” Instead, consider centralizing your data growing AI capabilities, and having a thoughtful
into one or at most a small number of data AI strategy, will help investors value your
warehouses. company appropriately.
Recognize what data is valuable, and Government Relations: Companies in
what is not: It is not true that having many highly regulated industries (self-driving cars,
terabytes of data automatically means an healthcare) face unique challenges to stay
AI team will be able to create value from compliant. Developing a credible, compelling
that data. Expecting an AI team to magically AI story that explains the value and benefits
create value from a large dataset is a formula your project can bring to an industry or society,
that comes with a high chance of failure, is an important step in building trust and
and I have tragically seen CEOs over-invest goodwill. This should be coupled with direct
in collecting low-value data, or even acquire communication and ongoing dialogue with
a company for its data only to realize the regulators as you rollout your project.
target company’s many terabytes of data is
not useful. Avoid this mistake by bringing an Customer/User Education: AI will likely bring
AI team in early during your process of data significant benefits to your customers, so make
acquisition, and let them help you prioritize sure the appropriate marketing and product
what types of data to acquire and save. roadmap messages are disseminated.
Because of the scarcity
Create network effect and platform Talent/Recruitment:
Finally, AI can also be used to of AI talent, strong employer branding will have
advantages:
build more traditional moats. For example, a significant effect on your ability to attract and
platforms with network effects are highly retain such talent. AI engineers want to work
defensible businesses. They often have a on exciting and meaningful projects. A modest
natural “winner takes all” dynamic that forces effort to showcase your initial successes can go
companies to either grow fast or die. If AI a long way.
© DeepLearning.AI All rights reserved. | deeplearning.ai 5
Because AI today Deep learning, one of the fastest growing areas
Internal Communications:
is still poorly understood and Artificial General of AI, is showing parallels to the rise of the
Intelligence specifically has been over-hyped, internet. Today, we find that:
there is fear, uncertainty and doubt. Many
employees are also concerned about their
Any typical company + Deep Learning
jobs being automated by AI, though this varies
technology ≠ AI company
widely by culture (for example, this fear appears
much more in the US than in Japan). Clear
For your company to become great at AI, you
internal communications both to explain AI
will have to organize your company to do the
and to address such employees’ concerns will
things that AI lets you do really well.
reduce any internal reluctance to adopt AI.
For your company to be great at AI, you
A historical note, important for must have:
your success
Resources to systematically execute
Understanding how the internet transformed on multiple valuable AI projects: AI
industries is useful for navigating the rise of AI. companies have the outsourced and/or in-
There is a mistake that many businesses made house technology and talent to systematically
navigating the rise of the internet that I hope execute on multiple AI projects that deliver
direct value to the business.
you will avoid as you navigate the rise of AI.
There
We learned in the internet era that: Sufficient understanding of AI:
should be general understanding of AI,
with appropriate processes in place to
Shopping Mall + Website ≠ internet company systematically identify and select valuable AI
projects to work on.
Even if a shopping mall built a website and sold
The company’s strategy
Strategic direction:
things on a website, that by itself did not turn
is broadly aligned to succeed in an AI-
the shopping mall into a true internet company.
powered future.
What defines a true internet company is: Have
you organized your company to do the things
that the internet lets you do really well?
Turning your great company into a great
For example, internet companies engage in AI company is challenging but feasible with
the support of great partners. My team at
pervasive A/B testing, in which we routinely
DeepLearning AI is committed to helping
launch two versions of a website and measure
partners with their AI transformations, and I will
which works better. An internet company may
continue to share additional best practices.
even have hundreds of experiments running
at the same time; this is very hard to do with a
An AI Transformation program may take 2-3
physical shopping mall. Internet companies can
years, but you should expect to see initial concrete
also ship a new product every week and thus
results within 6-12 months. By investing in an
learn much faster than a shopping mall that
AI transformation, you will stay ahead of your
might update its design only once per quarter. competitors and leverage AI capabilities to
Internet companies have unique job descriptions significantly advance your company.
for roles such as product manager and software
engineer, and those jobs have unique workflows Andrew Ng
and processes for how they work together.
Chairman and CEO, DeepLearning
© DeepLearning.AI All rights reserved. | deeplearning.ai 6
